Phase 2: connect the existing Noesis frontend to real multimodal AI analysis.

IMPORTANT:
The existing frontend is working and has already been tested end to end.

DO NOT redesign the application.
DO NOT change the walkthrough UX.
DO NOT add features.
DO NOT change the visual styling unless absolutely required for an error/loading state.

Your job in this phase is only to replace the mocked analysis with real analysis from GPT-5.6 Sol.

CURRENT APP
This is the existing Vite + React + TypeScript + Tailwind app under artifacts/noesis.

The existing stable frontend contract is:

src/lib/types.ts
- NoesisAnalysis
- NoesisRegion

The current mocked analysis is:

src/lib/mockAnalysis.ts

The result screen, VisualCanvas, hotspots, walkthrough and relationship highlighting already consume this contract correctly.

We now need:

uploaded image
→ server-side endpoint
→ GPT-5.6 Sol multimodal analysis
→ structured NoesisAnalysis JSON
→ existing frontend

MODEL

Use the official OpenAI JavaScript SDK.

Use:
model: gpt-5.6-sol

Use the Responses API.

Set reasoning effort to LOW initially because this is a live, latency-sensitive demo.

The model receives the ORIGINAL UPLOADED IMAGE as image input.

Do not perform a separate OCR step.
Do not use another vision provider.
Do not use another model.

SECURITY

The OpenAI API key is stored in the Replit secret:

OPENAI_API_KEY

The API key must NEVER be exposed to browser/client code.

Create the smallest server-side architecture compatible with this existing Vite/Replit app.

Inspect the current scaffold and choose the simplest reliable server-side endpoint architecture.

The frontend should call:

POST /api/analyze

Do not hardcode secrets.

STRUCTURED OUTPUT

The response MUST conform to the existing NoesisAnalysis contract.

Required shape:

{
  "title": "string",
  "image_type": "string",
  "central_question": "string",
  "overall_summary": "string",
  "big_takeaway": "string",
  "regions": [
    {
      "id": "string",
      "label": "string",
      "x": 0.0,
      "y": 0.0,
      "width": 0.0,
      "height": 0.0,
      "sequence_order": 1,
      "explanation": "string",
      "why_it_matters": "string",
      "related_region_ids": ["string"],
      "relationship_explanation": "string",
      "confidence": 0.0
    }
  ]
}

Use Structured Outputs / a strict JSON schema if supported by the current official SDK.

Validate the response server-side before returning it to the frontend.

REGION RULES

Return exactly 4–6 regions.

Coordinates must be NORMALIZED between 0 and 1 relative to the entire image:

x = left edge
y = top edge
width = region width
height = region height

All x, y, width, height values must be between 0 and 1.

x + width must not exceed 1.
y + height must not exceed 1.

Prefer BROAD explanatory regions rather than pixel-perfect small boxes.

This is important because the purpose is spatial teaching, not object detection.

MODEL PROMPT

Use the following as the core Noesis analysis prompt:

"You are Noesis, an AI system that teaches people HOW TO READ complex visuals.

The user has supplied one visual. It may be a chart, Sankey diagram, architecture diagram, dashboard, scientific figure, process flow, map, infographic, slide, form, UI screenshot, network diagram, or another information-dense visual.

Your goal is NOT to describe every visible object.

Your goal is to transform the visual into a guided learning experience.

FIRST analyse the visual as a whole.

Determine:

1. What kind of visual is this?
2. What is its apparent purpose?
3. What central question does it help answer?
4. What are the most important relationships, patterns, flows, comparisons, dependencies, transitions, anomalies, or conclusions?
5. What does a viewer need to notice, and in what order, to build a correct mental model of the visual?

Then construct the Noesis walkthrough.

TITLE
Give the visual a concise descriptive title grounded in what is visible.

IMAGE TYPE
Identify the type of visual.

CENTRAL QUESTION
Write the single most useful question that this visual helps the viewer answer.

OVERALL SUMMARY
In 2–3 concise sentences, explain what the viewer is looking at and how the visual is structured.

BIG TAKEAWAY
State the most important insight that is directly supported by the visual.

REGIONS

Choose exactly 4–6 explanatory regions.

The selected regions must TOGETHER teach the viewer how to understand the whole visual.

Do NOT simply choose the largest objects.

Do NOT simply identify labels.

Do NOT choose six isolated objects when relationships or flows are more important.

Prefer regions representing things such as:

- an important system component
- a major flow or transition
- a meaningful cluster
- a critical comparison
- an important dependency
- a major conversion point
- an anomaly
- a key result
- a necessary legend/axis only when needed to interpret the rest
- an important beginning/end state

The regions should be complementary rather than repetitive.

GUIDED ORDER

sequence_order defines the order in which a good teacher would walk a first-time viewer through this image.

Ask:

'Where should I direct the viewer's attention first?'

Then:

'What should they notice next so the previous point makes more sense?'

Continue until the visual's key insight becomes understandable.

EXPLANATION

For each region:

explanation:
Explain what the viewer should notice here in plain English.

why_it_matters:
Explain why this region is important to understanding the whole visual.

related_region_ids:
Identify other selected regions whose relationship to this region materially helps understanding.

relationship_explanation:
Explain the meaningful relationship between this region and its related regions.

CONFIDENCE

Return confidence from 0 to 1 based on how clearly the interpretation is supported by the image.

GROUNDING RULES

Only make claims supported by the supplied visual.

Do not invent unreadable labels or values.

Do not infer causality unless the visual actually supports it.

Do not use external factual knowledge to fill gaps in the image.

If something is uncertain, say so through lower confidence rather than pretending certainty.

Select regions for EXPLANATORY VALUE, not merely visual salience.

Prefer broad, clickable regions.

The goal is teaching quality, not object detection.

SUCCESS CRITERION

After completing the guided walkthrough, a viewer who initially found the image confusing should understand:

- what the visual is showing
- how its important parts relate
- how to read it
- what its main insight is."

FRONTEND INTEGRATION

Currently the app uses mockAnalysis.

Change the flow so that:

1. User uploads image.
2. Image preview continues to work exactly as now.
3. User clicks "X-Ray this visual".
4. Existing loading screen appears.
5. Send the image to POST /api/analyze.
6. Server sends image + Noesis prompt to GPT-5.6 Sol.
7. Server validates structured NoesisAnalysis output.
8. Frontend receives NoesisAnalysis.
9. Existing ResultScreen and walkthrough use the real response instead of mockAnalysis.

IMPORTANT:
The artificial 2–3 second mocked loading delay is no longer necessary.

The loading screen should stay visible for the actual API request duration and transition immediately once analysis succeeds.

ERROR HANDLING

If analysis fails:

- do not crash
- do not silently substitute the U.S. Energy mock data
- show a concise user-facing error
- offer "Try again"
- retain the uploaded image

Keep mockAnalysis.ts in the codebase for development/testing, but do not use it as a silent production fallback.

IMAGE HANDLING

Support the existing PNG/JPG/JPEG/WebP inputs.

Keep image sizes sensible for latency, but preserve enough resolution for dense diagrams and labels.

Do not aggressively shrink information-dense images.

For GPT-5.6 image detail, prefer a setting appropriate for dense visuals. Use original/auto image detail if supported by the current API/SDK implementation, while avoiding unnecessary transformations.

TESTING

After implementation:

1. typecheck
2. production build
3. run a real analysis using an uploaded test image
4. verify returned JSON satisfies NoesisAnalysis
5. verify 4–6 regions are returned
6. verify all normalized coordinates are valid
7. verify real hotspots render
8. verify Start Walkthrough works
9. verify sequence order works
10. verify related-region highlighting works
11. verify conclusion shows the real big_takeaway
12. verify browser resize keeps real hotspots aligned

DO NOT:
- add chat
- add user accounts
- add a database
- add PDF support
- add another AI model
- add OCR
- add web search
- add export
- add history
- add voice
- redesign the interface
- expand scope

When finished, report:

1. server architecture you added
2. files created/modified
3. exact OpenAI model and reasoning setting used
4. whether Structured Outputs are enforced
5. whether the API key remains server-side
6. latency observed on the real test
7. actual model output for one test image
8. whether all 4–6 hotspots rendered correctly
9. any coordinate/localisation issues
10. anything that still needs fixing

Do not proceed to any additional feature after this.